feat: Add TOML support to the built-in content loaders (#13941)
withastro/astro: .changeset/icy-keys-tickle.md

---
'astro': minor
'@astrojs/markdown-remark': patch
---

Add TOML support to the built-in content loaders.

> In Astro 5.2, Markdown gained support for TOML frontmatter, including for use within content collections.
> 
> This changeset extends that functionality to directly support TOML files in content collections.

Reviewer: ``````suggestion
In Astro 5.2, Astro added support for using TOML frontmatter in Markdown files instead of YAML. However, if you wanted to use TOML files as local content collection entries themselves, you needed to import your own parser and pass it to Astro's loader.

Astro 5.12 now directly supports loading data from TOML files in content collections in both the `glob()` and the `file()` loaders.

If you had added your own TOML content parser,  you can now remove it as this functionality is now included:

```diff
// src/content.config.ts

import { defineCollection } from "astro:content";
import { file } from "astro/loaders";
- import { parse as parseToml } from "toml";

const dogs = defineCollection({
-  loader: file("src/data/dogs.toml", { parser: (text) => parseToml(text).dogs }),
+ loader: file()
  schema: /* ... */
})
```

See Astro's [content collections guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#built-in-loaders) for more information on using the built-in content loaders.
``````
(I am notoriously bad at predicting what formatting will look like, but the above is the general idea!)

Since someone might possibly have a project that would benefit from updating, it's nice to show some kind of example!

Author: Thanks! I've updated the changeset, pulling largely from your example. However, I also added a note about some specific quirks with toml and how that interacts with the file loader.
